---
title: Notes on Artificial Intelligence
author: Francis Tseng (<a href="https://twitter.com/frnsys">@frnsys</a>)
subtitle: Last Updated 06.02.2016
header-includes:
    - \raggedbottom
    - \setmainfont[BoldFont = Lato-Bold.ttf, ItalicFont = Lato-Italic.ttf, BoldItalicFont = Lato-BoldItalic.ttf]{Lato-Regular.ttf}
    - \setmonofont{Inconsolata-g for Powerline.otf}
toc: yes
geometry: margin=0.75in
fontsize: 12pt
toccolor: cyan
urlcolor: blue
documentclass: book
numbersections: yes
linestretch: 1.1
papersize: a4paper
---


\chapter*{Introduction}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Introduction} \markboth{INTRODUCTION}{}

These are my personal notes which are broadly intended to cover the basics necessary for data science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence. They have been collected from a variety of different sources, which I include as references when I remember to - so take this as a disclaimer that most of this material is adapted, sometimes directly copied, from elsewhere. Maybe it's better to call this a "remix" or "katamari" sampled from resources elsewhere. I have tried to give credit where it is due, but sometimes I forget to include all my references, so I will generally just say that I take no credit for any material here.

Many of the graphics and illustrations are of my own creation or have been re-created from others, but plenty have also been sourced from elsewhere - again, I have tried to give credit where it is due, but some things slip through.

Data science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence are huge fields that share some foundational overlap but go in quite different directions. These notes are not comprehensive but aim to cover a significant portion of that common ground (and a bit beyond too). They are intended to provide intuitive understandings rather than rigorous proofs; if you are interested in those there are many other resources which will help with that.

Since mathematical concepts typically have many different applications and interpretations and often are arrived at through different disciplines and perspectives, I try to explain these concepts in as many ways as possible.

Some caveats:

- These are my personal notes; while I hope that they are helpful, they may not be helpful for you in particular!
- This is still very much a work in progress and it will be changing a lot - a lot may be out of order, missing, littered with TO DOs, etc.
- These notes are compiled from many sources, so there may be suddens shifts in notation/convention - one day I hope to do a deep pass and fix that, but who knows when that will be :\
- These notes are generated from [markdown files](https://github.com/frnsys/ai_notes), so they unfortunately lack any snazzy interactivity. I tried many ways to write markdown post-processors to add some, but it's a big time sink...

The raw notes and graphics are [open source](https://github.com/frnsys/ai_notes) - if you encounter errors or have a better way of explanining something, please don't hesistate to submit a pull request.

~ Francis Tseng ([@frnsys](https://twitter.com/frnsys))


